Rid-specific app breaking change (#35656)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/compatibility/sdk/8.0/runtimespecific-app-default.md

---
title: "Breaking change: Runtime-specific apps no longer self-contained"
description: Learn about a breaking change in the .NET 8 SDK where apps that specify a runtime identifier are no longer self-contained by default.
ms.date: 06/05/2023
---
# Runtime-specific apps no longer self-contained

Runtime-specific apps, or .NET apps with a `RuntimeIdentifier`, are no longer [self-contained](../../../deploying/index.md#publish-self-contained) by default. Instead, they are [framework-dependent](../../../deploying/index.md#publish-framework-dependent) by default.

This is a breaking change in the following situations:

- If you deployed, distributed, or published your app and didn't explicitly add the `SelfContained` property, but also didn't require that the .NET runtime be installed on the machine for it to work. In this case, you may have relied on the previous behavior to produce a non-framework-dependent app by default.

- If you rely on the IL Link tool. In this case, you'll have to take the steps described under [Recommended action](#recommended-action) to use IL Link again.

  > [!NOTE]

>   > Some publish properties, like `PublishTrimmed`, `PublishSingleFile`, and `PublishAot`, currently require `SelfContained` to work. If you use these properties, you'll need to add the `SelfContained` property.

Reviewer: We add SelfContained for all of these properties still after this change, though only when running `dotnet publish` *(`PublishSelfContained`  is set to true if these properties are and `PublishSelfContained` was not explicitly set to false. That may need to be clarified here.

> - For Blazor WebAssembly apps, because they relied on the previous behavior. However, the Blazor WASM team may side-step this breaking change in their SDK by adding `SelfContained` automatically for all apps, so Blazor customers shouldn't be affected.

Reviewer: This opening sentence doesn't read super well after reading the above bullet points imo, the reader may not have the opening sentence to the bullet point in their head anymore. And since Blazor has taken action, we dont actually expect this to break, but it should still be noted somewhere IMO just in case.

## Previous behavior

Previously, if a runtime identifier (RID) was specified (via [RuntimeIdentifier](../../../project-sdk/msbuild-props.md#runtimeidentifier)), the app was published as self-contained, even if `SelfContained` wasn't explicitly specified.

In addition:

> - The publish properties `PublishTrimmed`, `PublishSingleFile`, and `PublishAot` implied `PublishSelfContained` and therefore `SelfContained` during operations including build, restore, and publish.

Reviewer: PublishTrimmed didn't used to have this behavior

- The `PublishTrimmed` property did not imply `SelfContained`.
- The `PublishReadyToRun` property implied `SelfContained` if `SelfContained` wasn't specified.

## New behavior

Starting in .NET 8, for apps that target .NET 8 or a later version, `RuntimeIdentifier` no longer implies `SelfContained` by default. Instead, apps that specify a runtime identifier will be dependent on the .NET runtime by default (framework-dependent). Apps that target .NET 7 or earlier versions aren't affected.

In addition:

> - The publish properties `PublishTrimmed`, `PublishSingleFile`, and `PublishAot` now imply `SelfContained` during a publish operation only (that is, not for build or restore).

Reviewer: We should clarify that this is a dotnet publish operation only. Not the case for doing an msbuild t:/Publish.

- The `PublishTrimmed` property also now implies `SelfContained` during publish.
- The `PublishReadyToRun` property no longer implies `SelfContained` if the project targets .NET 8 or later.

## Version introduced

.NET 8 Preview 5

## Type of breaking change

This change can affect [source compatibility](../../categories.md#source-compatibility) and [binary compatibility](../../categories.md#binary-compatibility).

## Reason for change

- The new .NET SDK behavior aligns with Visual Studio behavior.

> - Framework-dependent apps are now smaller by default, since there aren't copies of .NET stored in each app.

Reviewer: We should also mention that when users have .NET managed outside of the app (FDD), they stay secure and up to date. If every app has its own copy of the runtime they won't get security updates for that app. But with this change they will by default now.

---
title: "Breaking change: Runtime-specific apps no longer self-contained"
description: Learn about a breaking change in the .NET 8 SDK where apps that specify a runtime identifier are no longer self-contained by default.
ms.date: 06/05/2023
---
# Runtime-specific apps no longer self-contained

Runtime-specific apps, or .NET apps with a `RuntimeIdentifier`, are no longer [self-contained](../../../deploying/index.md#publish-self-contained) by default. Instead, they are [framework-dependent](../../../deploying/index.md#publish-framework-dependent) by default.

This is a breaking change in the following situations:

> - If you deployed, distributed, or published your app and didn't explicitly add the `SelfContained` property, but also didn't require that the .NET runtime be installed on the machine for it to work. In this case, you may have relied on the previous behavior to produce a non-framework-dependent app by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If you deployed, distributed, or published your app and didn't explicitly add the `SelfContained` property, but also didn't require that the .NET runtime be installed on the machine for it to work. In this case, you may have relied on the previous behavior to produce a self-contained app by default.
```

- If you rely on the IL Link tool. In this case, you'll have to take the steps described under [Recommended action](#recommended-action) to use IL Link again.

> Blazor WebAssembly apps relied on the previous behavior. However, the Blazor SDK now adds `SelfContained` automatically for all apps, so Blazor customers shouldn't be affected.

Reviewer: I suppose we don't have to. I was trying to cover all of the bases -- technically there was a change in behavior in how blazor works now in that it (instead of the .net sdk) is responsible for setting SelfContained if a RID is specified. But for the end user, they dont really generally care about that information. I was worried about communicating this in case someone had injected custom stuff in their build between the sdk targets and blazor targets, the behavior would be different to my knowledge, but I am not 100% on that

## Previous behavior

Previously, if a runtime identifier (RID) was specified (via [RuntimeIdentifier](../../../project-sdk/msbuild-props.md#runtimeidentifier)), the app was published as self-contained, even if `SelfContained` wasn't explicitly specified.

In addition:

- If `PublishSelfContained` wasn't explicitly set to `false`, the publish properties `PublishSingleFile` and `PublishAot` implied `PublishSelfContained` and therefore `SelfContained` during operations including `dotnet build`, `dotnet restore`, and `dotnet publish`.
- The `PublishTrimmed` property did not imply `SelfContained`.
- The `PublishReadyToRun` property implied `SelfContained` if `SelfContained` wasn't specified.

## New behavior

Starting in .NET 8, for apps that target .NET 8 or a later version, `RuntimeIdentifier` no longer implies `SelfContained` by default. Instead, apps that specify a runtime identifier will be dependent on the .NET runtime by default (framework-dependent). Apps that target .NET 7 or earlier versions aren't affected.

In addition:

> - If `PublishSelfContained` isn't explicitly set to `false`, the publish properties `PublishTrimmed`, `PublishSingleFile`, and `PublishAot` now imply `SelfContained` during `dotnet publish` only (that is, not for `dotnet build` or `dotnet restore`).

Reviewer 3: Is it correct that we set `SelfContained` to true, but the behavior depends on the setting of `PublishSelfContained`? It's a weird mismatch. I know that there's some reason we have to set `SelfContained` for the thing to work even during publish only, but maybe the external description should be in the terms of `PublishSelfContained` as that one should be affecting publish only (at least eventually).

- The `PublishTrimmed` property also now implies `SelfContained` during `dotnet publish`.
- The `PublishReadyToRun` property no longer implies `SelfContained` if the project targets .NET 8 or later.

> [!NOTE]

> > If you publish using `msbuild t:/Publish`, the publish properties don't imply `SelfContained`.

Reviewer 3: This is even weirder - and even if we need to make that for implementation reasons... do we need to document it here? I find it just plain confusing.

Reviewer: I think we should document it here... I agree it's weird, but it's better that its documented and communicated than not, IMO

Reviewer 3: Oh - I read it wrong... it's not an implementation detail as such, if I read it correctly it means that if I run `msbuild /t:Publish` it will behave differently - meaning you have to explicitly specify self-contained, right?

In that case I would word it that way - in terms of the visible functionality - talking about setting properties is difficult to grasp I think. We could have both, but I would lead with the "humanly readable" description first :-)

Also - the spelling of `/t:Publish` is wrong.

> > If you publish using `msbuild t:/Publish`, the publish properties don't imply `SelfContained`.

Author: ```suggestion
> If you publish using `msbuild /t:Publish`, you must explicitly specify `SelfContained` if you want your app to be self-contained, even if your project has one of the listed publish properties.
```

## Version introduced

.NET 8 Preview 5

## Type of breaking change

This change can affect [source compatibility](../../categories.md#source-compatibility) and [binary compatibility](../../categories.md#binary-compatibility).

## Reason for change

- The new .NET SDK behavior aligns with Visual Studio behavior.

> - Framework-dependent apps are now smaller by default, since there aren't copies of .NET stored in each app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Framework-dependent apps are smaller by default, since there aren't copies of .NET stored in each app.
```

We didn't improve FDD apps size in any meaningful way in this release, this should just describe the difference between SCD and FDD.

Reviewer: Do you think it would be better to reword the benefit of this? I didn't communicate it super well. It is still true that it saves space on user's machines. If more apps are FDD because it's the default, then there will be less copies of .NET and therefore more space on the machine.

Reviewer 3: For me personally just dropping the "now" fixes the meaning, but I'm not a native speaker, so I can't tell for sure.

- Ideally, command-line options are orthogonal. In this case, the tooling supports both RID-specific self-contained deployment (SCD) and RID-specific framework-dependent deployment (FDD). So it didn't make sense that no RID defaulted to FDD and RID defaulted to SCD. This behavior was often confusing for users.

.NET 6 alerted users to this breaking change with the following warning:

**warning NETSDK1179: One of '--self-contained' or '--no-self-contained' options are required when '--runtime' is used.**

Now that customers have had time to add `SelfContained` explicitly, it's okay to introduce the break.

## Recommended action

If you're using .NET 7 or an earlier version and relied on the previous behavior where `SelfContained` was inferred, you'll see this warning:

**For projects with TargetFrameworks >= 8.0, RuntimeIdentifier no longer automatically gives a SelfContained app. To continue creating a .NET framework independent app after upgrading to 8.0, consider setting SelfContained explicitly.**

> Follow the guidance of the warning if you want to continue to produce self-contained apps. If you want to move to the new default, set `SelfContained` to `false` in the project file (`<SelfContained>false</SelfContained>`) or as a command-line argument, for example, `dotnet publish --no-self-contained`.

Reviewer 4: This suggestion seems out of place. The context of this section is "you're using .NET 7 and relied on the `SelfContained` default and you'll see the following message..." which would imply that they're going to want to continue to use the .NET 7 default. This suggestion on the other hand is showing them how to turn off `SelfContained` to align with .NET 8's default. Shouldn't it be telling them how to explicitly turn it on?
